#summary How to make Plugins for YOURLS

*!!!! This page is not complete yet. Still under work !!!!*

<table><tr><td>
= Plugins =

Plugins are additional PHP scripts that extend the functionalities or features of YOURLS. The core of YOURLS is designed to be as light as possible and avoid bloat (implementing functions not everybody needs) and to allow for easy customization.

Using the plugin architecture, you can add new features to YOURLS without having to modify core files. This way, your changes won't be lost when you upgrade your YOURLS installation.
</td><td width="220px">
<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />
</td></tr></table>

= Structure of a Plugin File =

A plugin file needs to be named `plugin.php` and to be located in its own subdirectory of `[YOURLS_ROOT]/user/plugins`, eg:
{{{
YOURLS_ROOT/user/plugins/my_sample_plugin/plugin.php
}}}

The plugin file `plugin.php` needs to begin with a header like the following one:
{{{
<?php
/*
Plugin Name: My Sample Plugin
Plugin URI: http://mysite.com/yourls-sample-plugin/
Description: This plugin does something and something else
Version: 1.0
Author: Ozh
Author URI: http://ozh.org/
*/
}}}

= Plugin API =

YOURLS core uses two 'hooks', *filters* and *actions*, allowing your plugin to 'hook into' what YOURLS does.

  * *actions* are the hooks YOURLS triggers at specific points or during specific action. It's a way of telling "hey, this particular event just occured", so your plugin can execute a defined function at this point.
  * *filters* are the hooks YOURLS triggers to allow modification of a variable before returning it, sending it into the database or displaying it.
  
== Actions ==

*Actions* are triggered by specific actions: inserting a link in the database, sending headers to the browser, redirecting to a long URL...

A typical action in YOURLS is a function call like the following:
{{{
yourls_do_action( 'some_event' );
}}}

The function `yourls_do_action()` can also accept parameters to give more context to a particular event. For instance, the following action occurs on redirection to a long URL:
{{{
yourls_do_action( 'redirect_shorturl', $url );
}}}

=== Create an Action function ===

The steps to create an action function are:
  # define a custom PHP function that should execute when a particular event occurs;
  # hook your function to the particular event, using YOURLS functions `yourls_add_action()`;
  # put your custom function and its hook into a plugin file

=== Example of a simple Action function ===

When an admin page is sent to the browser, after the YOURLS logo has been printed an event occurs
{{{
yourls_do_action( 'html_logo' );
}}}

Let's add custom text right after the logo:
{{{
// our custom function that adds text
function my_custom_text() {
	echo "<p>This is a custom text</p>";
}

// Now hook our custom function into the 'html_logo' event
yourls_add_action( 'html_logo', 'my_custom_text');
}}}

Simple heh?

=== Example of an advanced Action function ===

Before the browser is redirect to another location (like when loading a short URL that points to a long URL), the following event is triggered:
{{{
yourls_do_action( 'pre_redirect', $location, $code );
}}}
with `$location` being the location to be redirected to, and `$code` being the status header to be sent ('301 Moved Permanently' most of the time)

Now if you hook a custom function into the event 'pre_redirect', it will be passed `array($location, $code)` as an argument.

Let's interrupt the redirection with a message telling the user they are about to be redirected to another URL:
{{{
// Hook our custom function into the 'pre_redirect' event
yourls_add_action( 'pre_redirect', 'warning_redirection' );

// Our custom function that will be triggered when the event occurs
function warning_redirection( $args ) {
	$location = $args[0];
	$code = $args[1];
	
	// Print the message
	echo "<p>This is a redirection page to: $url</p>";
	echo "<p>Click <a href="$url">here</a> to proceed</p>";
	
	// Now die so the normal flow of event is interrupted
	die();
}
}}}

== Filters ==

*Filters* are functions that process data, typically before being handled or returned by an internal function of YOURLS.

A typical filter in YOURLS is a function call like the following:
{{{
$value = yourls_appply_filter( 'some_filter', $value );
}}}

=== Create a Filter function ===

The steps to create a filter function are:
  # define a custom PHP function that accepts arguments, process them and *return* them;
  # hook your function to the particular filter, using YOURLS function `yourls_add_filter()`;
  # put your custom function and its hook into a plugin file.
  
=== Example of a filter function ===

When a short URL is created with no custom keyword provided, a random (actually, sequential) keyword is generated. Then this keyword goes through the following filter:
{{{
$keyword = yourls_apply_filter( 'random_keyword', $keyword );
}}}

If a custom function hooks into the 'random_keyword' filter, it will be sent `$keyword` as an argument.

Let's append 'iloveyourls' to every sequential keyword, so that the generated shorturl become `http://site.com/abciloveyourls` instead of `http://site.com/abc`
{{{
// hook our custom function into the 'random_keyword' filter
yourls_add_filter( 'random_keyword', 'my_silly_function' );

// Our silly custom function
function my_silly_function( $original_keyword ) {
	$silly_keyword = $original_keyword . "iloveyourls";
	
	// a filter function MUST return something once its arguments are processed
	return $silly_keyword;
}
}}}